# Genetically Modified Food

## Vocabulary list

| English                    | German                       |
| -------------------------- | ---------------------------- |
| resistant                  | resistent                    |
| DNA (Desoxyriboncleicacid) | DNS (Desoxyribonukleinsäure) |
| herbicide                  | Herbizide                    |
| drought                    | Dürre                        |
| nutritious                 | nahrhaft                     |
| properties                 | Eigenschaften                |
| agronomic characteristics  | agronomische Merkmale        |
| pharmaceutrical products   | pharmazeutische Produkte     |
| requirements               | Anforderungen                |
| controversial              | umstritten                   |
| restricted                 | beschränkt                   |

## Table of Contents

- [Genetically Modified Food](#genetically-modified-food)
    - [Vocabulary list](#vocabulary-list)
    - [Table of Contents](#table-of-contents)
    - [Slide show](#slide-show)
        - [Definition](#definition)
        - [Active growing GM-Food](#active-growing-gm-food)
        - [Types of modification](#types-of-modification)
        - [How it is done](#how-it-is-done)
        - [Regulation](#regulation)
        - [Why create GM-Foods?](#why-create-gm-foods)
        - [Are GMOs safe?](#are-gmos-safe)
            - [Pros](#pros)
            - [Contras](#contras)
    - [Worksheet](#worksheet)
        - [How much do you know about GM-foods?](#how-much-do-you-know-about-gm-foods)
        - [Definition](#definition-1)
        - [Types of modification](#types-of-modification-1)
        - [Controversy](#controversy)

## Slide show

### Definition

- Make food more nutritious
- Resistance to herbicide
- Resistance to heat/cold

### Active growing GM-Food

- Corn
- Tomatos
- Salmon

- USA is top leader of growing GM-crops

### Types of modification

- resistance
    - diseases, pests
    - herbicides, pesticides
- nutrition
    - efficient use of resources e.g. fertilizer
- stress tolerance
    - e.g. drought
- growth
    - speed

### How it is done

- Traditional breeding
    - Crossing plants and selecting offspring
    - Desired gene(s) inserted with other genetic material
- Mutagenesis
    - Exposing seeds to chemicals or radation
    - Random changes in genome, usually unpredictable
- RNA Interference
    - Switching off selected genges with RNA
    - Targeted gene(s) switched off or "silenced"
- Transgenics
    - Inserting selected genes unsing recombinant DNA methods
    - Only gene(s) inserted at desired locations selected
- Gene editing
    - Used to delete genes using engineered nucleases (CRISPR, TALENs, ZFNs)
    - ...

### Regulation

- US and EU have separate Regulations
- EU
    - Regulated by the European Food Safety Authority
    - Has stricter regulations
- US
    - Care more about money, "Greedy bastards"
    - Different companies can change regulations
        - EPA
        - USDA
        - FDA
    - No need to label GM-foods
    - Accounts for 39% of all uses

### Why create GM-Foods?

- Why?
    - To help and test
- Who profits?
    - Farmers, consumers, seeds and chemical companies and developing countries
- Are they necessaey?
    - Not really

### Are GMOs safe?

#### Pros

- GM-food is better food, why should something better be bad?
    - Resistance to insects
- Maybe they don't burn as fast as the rain forests? *(wtf?)*
- They are safe in Europe, because the EU has the right regulations
    - Who knows if it's safe in the US

#### Contras

- Potentially creating invasive species
- Modifications can affect other plants
- Ethical question
- Results are speculative
- No sources in the text

## Worksheet

### How much do you know about GM-foods?

- [ ] Not much at all
- [x] **A little**
- [ ] I have done some research and can create an informed opinion
- [ ] I know a considerable amount

### Definition

- DNA
- DNA
- resistant
- herbicides
- drought
- nutritious
- properties
- parmaceutical products

### Types of modification

- requirements
- pests
- growing population
- lack of water
- less agricultural land
- climate change

### Controversy

- controcversial
- side-effects
- discovered
- restricted
